Pamela Cayton spent 10 years of her life in Nepal,
serving as a teacher in an orphanage.
Little did she know
that these children were going to forever change her life
and her relationship to the field of education.
Upon her return to the west,
she settled in Silicon Valley,
180 degrees off her previous experience.
Shocked at the lack of genuine curiosity from the children
and their sense of entitlement,
she began to devise a new system of teaching
called essential education,
which allows children to learn through the understanding
of the interconnectedness of all things.
(light music)
I was listening to your talk
a little while ago
and I just, I found what you were saying so compelling,
because you had a personal journey in education
where you had been with a monastery in,
was it, were you in Nepal, Tibet, where were you?
In Nepal.
Uh hmm.
For 10 years.
And now you come back to the United States
and you're trying to find proper education
for your young children,
and this was quite startling
because you ended up in Silicon Valley.
Uh hmm.
And the huge chasm
between the understandings
and levels of compassion, appreciation
and everything that you had experienced in Nepal
and what you experienced here,
were so dramatically different
you had to start your own school system.
Uh hmm.
So can you pick the journey up from there.
From there? From when I...
From when you landed in Silicon Valley,
what you started noticing
as differences between the children that you had been with
among the Nepalese people in the monastery,
and what you found in Silicon Valley
at a time when it was quite wealthy.
Uh hmm. And I was actually on the edge of Silicon Valley,
in a beautiful idyllic little area
to raise children as it turned out,
in Santa Cruz, California.
But it was also actually going through huge changes too,
because a lot of the people who worked in Silicon Valley,
the dot-commers, were coming to buy property in Santa Cruz,
so the whole face of that economy and environment
was changing dramatically as a result.
So it was becoming a very affluent area.
The major difference was,
that I observed was that
children seemed to be just very entitled,
appeared to have this sort of,
this idea of entitlement.
A real lack of sort of understanding or appreciation
for what they had.
Not much gratitude, if any at all,
and I often say, you know, that this was a
partly a result of the confused parenting styles
of our generation.
We kind of threw a lot of the old,
sort of old-fashioned manners out,
and it was one of things that I thought
okay, maybe we just need to start to incorporate
some old-fashioned manners,
but not in the way that children would just
you know, please and thank you in a rote kind of way,
but really understand what they had to be grateful for.
And this was huge,
I mean this was probably the major difference that I saw
in the attitudes of children
in California, in the States,
that compared with in the monastery.
And can you talk about
the life there in the monastery and the children there
in comparison for a moment.
Yeah, well the children pretty much all came from,
a number of them were orphans,
Tibetan refugees,
came from very poor families,
and from dawn until
well into the evening
around 10 or 11 o'clock,
they would be studying,
doing chores non-stop.
And yet they were, they were all happy,
they were respectful,
they really seemed to appreciate
actually everything that they have,
as little as they did have.
So that was a real,
I mean right there was a very different
one, learning environment,
very different expectations placed on these young children,
that they could,
it was okay for them to be up at dawn
and not go to bed until 10 or 11 o'clock at night,
and be studying, learning, doing chores all day long.
So here, whereas here, in the States,
it was very different,
where children actually were given a lot of power
and not given a lot of training in taking responsibility.
And they couldn't handle the power.
And I used to say,
well these children,
actually this is not making them happy
because the children usually who are crying and screaming
loud, more loud, you know, the louder they were screaming,
the more they were looking for boundaries, guidance.
Right.
And it was something that I say going back again
to the confused generation of parents.
We were kind of allowing too much freedom,
giving too much power to the children
and not enough training in how to use that.
So you began a school.
You started or founded a school.
Uh hmm.
And I assume
that you didn't have instant transformation.
It's not as though you had a student body of people
who were instantly grateful
and sliding into what you would have felt
would be more ideal behavior for human happiness.
Let's talk about that part of the journey,
once the kids came on board,
and how you started inculcating
some of these finer attributes of life
into lives that were as you say
not particularly grateful
and perhaps self-centered and so forth.
What were some of the first obstacles you noticed?
Well.
First and foremost I would say
that well my first challenge really
was to try to awaken this awareness in them
in the mind of the child
of how fortunate and what they did have
to be grateful for.
How fortunate they were.
And that's a tough thing
because most of our learning
we do through experience, right?
So if I could have taken them
to a third world country, you know,
and they could have experienced what it was like
to really not have anything
and yet appreciate everything about your life,
you know everything that you did have.
Then I think that true learning would have taken place
more easily.
But what we did was we
we actually just talked about the interconnectedness
of everything that they had.
You know, the interdependence
and that how everything that they had
was dependent upon the labors and the efforts
of so many people and animals.
So this was a...
You started with some simple things, right?
Like snack.
Snack.
Their snacks in the school,
the clothing the were wearing.
Exactly.
Talk about how you
helped them understand this
and where you started seeing the lights go on
for the first time.
Uh hmm, well it was really actually
that's a pretty quick "aha" moment
that you start to see in the minds of a child,
when they start to just trace back,
you know, "Where did your snack come from?"
"Look, you've got crackers today.
"And you've got cheese.
"Where do crackers come from?"
"Oh, they come from the store,"
or "My mom buys them."
"Well, where does your mom get them from?"
And you just trace it back to there
and they can go back into very complex
you know, thinking of, you know,
and the trucks and the truck drivers,
and you can even go into
where do the trucks come from.
Uh hmm.
So it gets very,
I mean it's vast and it's never-ending.
And they love that exploration.
They really enjoy it
and they see it as a challenge
and they love to try to trace it back.
So that was pretty quick.
It definitely takes them outside of themselves,
and you know one of the differences in the culture as well,
when I compare the culture in Nepal,
one it's the monastic setting,
the other is just in Asia itself.
You know there seems to be more of
and there's a lot of reasons I think for this,
but there's more the view,
the child grows up in more view of themselves
as being a part of a group.
You know, a part of something larger than just themselves.
So it's more that collectivist sort of, you know, viewpoint.
Whereas, here in the States,
I saw it's more focused on the individual.
So what this does,
just doing this exercise,
(coughs) excuse me,
doing this exercise of really tracing back
where everything that they,
well you know, let's start with the snack,
and then go to the clothes
or go to anything that you want to choose.
Shoes.
The building we're in.
The carpet.
Anything at all.
Then immediately what starts to arise in the child
is just this more awareness of being part of
a never-ending chain of interconnection
and that their whole lives and their well-being
is dependent upon so many others, as well.
And then we can turn this of course to,
so what arises from that is an appreciation,
a natural appreciation,
but really understanding why you need to appreciate so much
and or you have so much to appreciate.
And also gratitude, of course.
So that gratitude, and seeing that
and that wish actually to reciprocate (coughs)
also arises from this step (coughs).
So, yeah, that's.
And so from there,
to start creating something
maybe even a little more proactive.
Starting to plant the seeds of the desire
to be say, generous and kind.
How did you spark that in kids?
So to be generous and kind.
If I'm being, feeling entitled
and a little, maybe a little selfish,
and you know, my stuff.
So, it was sort of the natural thing,
okay, "How does it feel?"
You can go back to how does it feel, right?
You have to base it on personal experience.
"How does it feel when you,
"when somebody gives something to you?"
Look, so many people have given so much.
Look at your mom, she works to give you,
you can take it on that level.
"How does it make it you feel?"
It feels really good, you know.
"Have you ever given to other people?"
What kind of things?
Like when you go to a birthday party,
or you say thank you to somebody,
how does that feel?
It feels good.
So they start to become aware
of that, of what it feels like actually
to be generous and to be one of those givers.
Everything is giving something,
they start to conclude.
Everything is giving something.
So what would you like to give.
Now at this juncture, actually,
I'm going to go back a little bit
and say that that's how I first started sort of randomly,
moving around to hit different things
like generosity, kindness,
working with our emotions.
And then after some years
of implementing different ideas
and different methodologies,
I actually started to become aware
what we needed was a more integrated
and comprehensive program,
that was actually like a step-by-step program
that would awaken and spark
in the mind of the child
what I believed would really bring them
true happiness and fulfillment.
Because what I had come up with,
am I okay to go with this?
Yeah I was going to say
that's not part of the American curriculum.
No.
The pursuit of happiness.
That's right.
And the understanding of
the tenants of and building blocks of happiness
is not part of the western way.
Correct.
So, and sadly lacking.
And so, I saw that just the way that
and the approach of the sort of
"me first" and focus on the individual
in children growing up feeling very entitled
was actually the result of that,
was not bringing the children happiness,
nor was it bringing the parents
and people around them happiness.
So I really saw this as my number one
sort of major project here,
is how do I awaken or start to develop
help to develop these qualities in these children,
this awareness of how they can have the power
to transform their own lives
and become happier people
and how they can impact those around them
in a way that brings more happiness to others
and thus to themselves as well.
So it's this interconnected way of looking at things.
But how to do that was not tell them
what they need to do,
but rather awaken that in their minds.
Because I believe that every child and every being
has that, those good qualities within their mind.
It's sort of like the nature of the mind and the self.
But, you know, it has to be awakened.
Uh hmm.
And unless, and we need to as parents
and educators need to take responsibility
to be the guide in that way.
And I think this was one of the things
that I saw when I say
"confused generation of parents"
is that we gave a lot of power to our children
so we were kind of reverting,
we threw out the way of where we were
the authoritarian figure
and telling our children, you know,
"We need to do this and you need to do that."
And in an oppressive way.
But we actually didn't replace it with anything
for awhile.
Now we're starting to get that together.
Now we're starting to find a middle way.
So you know this task ahead of you,
I mean, you had to figure,
you had to create a system.
Figure it out.
And so I had to create a system, exactly.
So I knew what I wanted.
First and foremost I knew that what I wanted
in essence was to create and provide
the best possible foundation.
Because those young years are the foundational years
for the rest of their lives.
They're so important.
That's when all that brain development's happening.
Children learn more in the first five years of their life
than any other time in their lives.
So it was really,
it's a very critical and precious time.
This is, these are the foundational years.
Children, primarily what determines the child's,
or gives the greatest, has the greatest influence
on the development of the child,
is first and foremost the parents and the family,
the home environment.
But in this culture,
that home environment and the family
was breaking apart.
It was, and that's a big topic right there.
But I could see that a lot of what I was experiencing
and observing, these differences,
was greatly due to that as well.
The breakdown of the home, the family unit.
Cause consistency went out the door with that.
Right, I mean and that's a big one,
consistency where even in the orphanages...
Family values.
Yes, and the orphanages you were working in,
the monastery and such,
at least there were consistent values.
Absolutely.
Consistent values, framework, structure, discipline.
And I think what came out
what we have in this culture, very much so,
is the disintegration a lot of the time
of the family unit.
No clear family values.
Values that change,
depending on who's living in the home at the time,
who's doing the parenting,
blended families.
A lot of these issues that you know
weren't so much issues
or you don't see so many of those issues
in other cultures, Asian cultures.
More the extended family,
so there's that respect and appreciation for the elders.
Not what you see here.
So there's a lot of things
that actually have contributed to
issues and problems that we're now facing.
But you actually started by
respecting them as well,
respecting the students,
in that you as I was listening to you
you were talking about how at one point
and I don't know if this was the beginning
of the seven steps of the program,
but asking them,
"What do you want?"
Uh hmm.
From this experience here at school.
Right.
So creating that comprehensive program I talked about,
because over the years starting in different places,
I started to observe that actually there was
foundational steps that were important
in order to start to change the child's,
or for the child's thinking to start to transform
into this more sort of expanded view of themselves
as a part of something much greater.
And to actually find in themselves
and understand logically
why they needed to be take responsibility
for their own happiness.
Uh hmm.
And for the happiness of others around them.
So, this, I put together actually
I mean through this whole sort of experimental phase
and it was really my own personal research,
what I call the seven steps now.
And where I started is I realized that you have to start
where the child is at.
And actually it's the same place where most
beings are at.
And we have this instinctual sort of drive
to satisfy oneself,
for ourselves really deep inside
to feel good, to be happy.
So, uhm.
So that was my step one.
I would ask the children,
"What do you want?
"What do you really want?"
And when they would come to school
and we still do this
at the beginning of the school year,
"What kind of a classroom
"do you want to come to each day?"
And so they generate their own idea around that,
actually they have lots of ideas around that.
And I ask them to choose their,
the thing that they most would like to have,
you know, at school.
And so they come up with things
like sharing and friends and kindness
and speaking kindly to each other, you know.
Yes, you can be my friend.
Those kinds of things.
And they create a collage,
they write about it.
They write the word that they really want
and create a collage
or sometimes, you know, it might take a different form
where, you know, around little mirror frames or,
you can get creative with that.
But when they're all placed together,
we put them all together
and it forms like a patchwork
and that becomes representative of the classroom.
And we keep referring back to that
everyday, all year long.
"How're we going?
"Is this what we wanted?
"Is this what we said we wanted?"
Becomes the touchstone.
Becomes the touchstone, yeah.
Uh hmm.
So, and it's tangible.
They can see it.
They generated it.
Right.
So it becomes actually
their own set of golden rules, if you like.
And their goals.
And their aspiration.
So we talk about this as sort of being
'Wow, imagine if we came to school
"everyday and it was filled with all these good things.
"So, let's see if we can make that magic happen."
And after awhile,
maybe after a week of checking it out,
we'll say, "Well how are you doing?
"Do we have this environment?"
"Well, sometimes, but we all wished for it
"then what gets in the way."
Is it enough just to have the wish.
Or do we actually have to do something
to make it happen.
Is that step two, then?
We're getting to step two, yeah.
So, they come up with through analyzing it,
they say "Okay, yeah we will,
"I guess we have to do something."
And I say, "Or do you wait
"for somebody else to do it?
"Do you look to see if other people are doing it?
"Or do you act first?"
And they say, "Well, I guess we should do it, first."
So they figure it all out.
So this brings us to step two.
And step two is
okay, so we actually have to take action.
Can you think of anything
that arises or comes from, all by itself?
That doesn't come from something else?
And so they start to examine that.
And that's when we can spend a lot of time
in that step two.
Because it's so vast, actually.
It never ends.
Uh hmm.
And so you explore it,
I mean and all these steps by the way
are integrated throughout our curriculum
so you'll find you know, we'll start the week off
with a focus on one of the particular steps
or mini-steps in between each of those major steps.
And (coughs)
and the whole,
all the curriculum
is going to be focused on that step
that we're at.
So it becomes really holistic,
a very holistic, integrated way to learn
social studies, science, language arts,
art projects, movement.
And it's very easy to do, actually,
according to all the standards as well,
the state standards.
So it's very adaptable.
Uh hmm.
Because I often say, you know,
these steps are not something that
you're putting on top of anything.
It's actually just awakening your understanding
of the way things exist.
And understanding things
on a little bit deeper level.
Sometimes the questions we ask
might sound a little bit you know,
maybe profound or too sophisticated.
But on the other hand
actually they're very simple for the children,
it's just we don't ask the question.
Uh hmm.
If you ask the question,
children come up with the answer.
And they are quite capable
of exploring those questions
in a very logical, you know, scientific way.
So we use this step seven of course
to explore not only where everything comes from,
you know like our material things,
and, but also
our happy classroom, you know,
and where does that come in.
What kind of behavior,
what kind of actions,
what does kindness look like?
You know, what does it feel like?
What does it sound like?
And so they can articulate that.
They learn to articulate it
and recognize what kind of actions
actually give them the result they really want.
(coughs) Excuse me.
No problem.
Do you hear feedback from the parents?
At what point do you start...
Absolutely.
.. hearing them say
"What are you doing in this classroom?
"Because my little child
"has really lit up.
"She's wanting to be helpful."
Right away, right away, we do.
And actually at the,
when we start here
as far as, you know, making the magic happen,
we usually ground it in a,
in an ongoing sort of
ah, uhm,
activity that is symbolic
of what we're creating.
So for instance,
and it's usually based,
somehow centered and integrated into our theme.
So for instance,
we were doing, we've been developing
this curriculum around the elements,
and we talk about the precious elements.
And of course all these steps can go through
all the elements.
And we work with one element at a time.
And they fit in with the season.
So we'll start with the fire element
in the beginning of the school year.
It's going to be the end of summer.
It's still summer.
And then on into the Indian summer (coughs)
and so we explore the fire, the heat,
the element of fire
both internally and externally
and the interconnection between the two.
Um. Interesting.
So then we also have, you know,
it's all tied in of course with emotions as well.
So we started a project
there where we had
we had like a plate,
bamboo plate actually.
Put a mirror in the center.
They put a mirror in the center
and that represents or symbolizes their mind
and what is created from their mind
and then the whole thing is going,
it symbolizes heat or the sun.
So we are like the sun.
So we draw that sort of metaphor analogy
and how are we like the sun.
Well we generate heat.
And we actually generate sort of light.
And we can generate you know,
these different, these different kinds of lights,
like we integrate color as a form of
recognizing helpful emotions,
and working with our emotions.
So red is generosity, for instance.
So at the end of the day,
in the circle at the end,
because very important is our rhythm through the day
and our daily rituals,
and I'll talk about that as far as
sort of really creating a very nice framework
and guide for the children.
And at the end of the day
we always have a dedication,
and look at the day
and how have we done,
and how did we go at sort of
creating the kind of climate
that we wanted in our classroom,
so this is fitting in with those elements.
Create the kind of climate.
Do we like it too hot?
No, no, we don't like it too hot.
It makes us anxious and upset,
frustrated,
and we sometimes explode, you know,
like a volcano.
Do we like it too cold?
We talk about cold-hearted, warm-hearted.
So there's, it's, really you can get very creative
you can really make a nice integrated program.
We always teach in themes,
because themes,
if you don't teach in themes
then learning becomes very fragmented
and that's not actually the way things exist.
Right.
So we teach in themes.
So then at the end of the day,
we, the children in this step two,
become kindness detectives.
And they really try to take note of and notice
you know, either their friends,
who are doing things that are actually helping
to create the kind of climate
that we want in our classroom.
And they acknowledge each other
at the end of the day.
And then according to the acknowledgements
then they, the children are awarded
colored tiles.
And the colored tiles are made from glass,
because we've studied glass already
in this fire element
where we're exploring fire,
and where does glass come from.
And glass comes from extreme heat,
and sand, you know.
And they, we went to a glass factory
and saw how it was being made, etc., etc.
and so it becomes more experiential.
And so anyway,
then they earn these tiles
and they're starting to create
this beautiful sun
that they'll take home
at the end of that study,
So the thematic study.
So that's something that's very
it's sort of reinforcing the positive,
acknowledging, rejoicing at their friends.
And making very material.
And making it very material.
And they see it.
So these are the kind of things
that their parents
that definitely goes home to the parents.
They, parents, know about this
and hear about it, a lot about it,
and you'll hear,
they hear their children saying things about
their little brother.
"Oh he was so patient.
"I think we need to give him a white tile."
(laughs)
Yeah, so just really recognizing the positive.
and it's important for them to really see
the positive in the other children.
And also to know that people,
the other children really see the positive actions
that they do as well.
Everybody gets acknowledged.
But there's less of a focus,
of course, again on oneself.
Exactly.
And more on the other.
And where does it go through there?
Does it become more sophisticated,
as you go through the steps?
And where does it ultimately end up?
Yeah, well, sophisticated.
As the children get older
and understand these things,
it just becomes sort of a way of looking at the world.
It starts to transform their way
of viewing themselves in the world.
And they start to see that okay,
for instance, with actions that they do,
they start to see that,
you know, if they do something harmful
or something mean, you know,
then it doesn't bring the result that they want.
Does it become some
self-regulating there?
Self-regulating, exactly.
Which is one of the primary things
we hope that they gain from this.
And definitely we do see a big change.
The next step,
if I probably should go through the steps first,
and we can talk, you know.
Absolutely.
Cause I could go, as you've noticed,
I could go on a very long time
and then segueway into different things
so I'll try to stay on the steps.
Okay.
This, what naturally I saw arising from
children understanding the interconnection as well
was to understand that the natural way that
things existed in this very complex,
interconnected universe that we live in,
was, that everything is constantly changing.
That, you know, it's just when you follow
step-by-step the chain, the interconnected chain,
of what brought our snack to our table,
that's just naturally showing change.
There's absolutely nothing,
so that nothing
that is static, that does not change.
But I ask the children that.
"Can you think of something
"that never changes?"
And of course, they can't.
So they start to realize and become more aware that
that the world around them's constantly changing.
That they themselves are constantly changing.
Their emotions are constantly changing.
And then we can tie in that you know,
well what causes,
where do your emotions come from, right?
And as everything comes from something
do emotions come from something?
And they will say,
"Well it comes from a thought,
"from thinking things."
First of all, though,
they'll think it comes from somebody else.
Uh hmm.
So it comes from actions that
that often, you know that other children will do,
or it comes from frustration
at not being able to do what they want.
But then they can trace it back.
Yeah, but then you can examine that too.
And you say, okay.
So anyway, I'll get to that
when we get to a later step.
But so they can examine this and see
that actually the way that they're thinking, you know,
and their thoughts are constantly changing,
are also affecting their moods
and their emotions.
So the next step that naturally arises out of that
is the relativity of perspective.
Which is your mind creates your reality.
And we all have our own minds.
And so do we all see everything,
do we all see things the same way?
And so we have some great activities there,
some optical illusions,
and some gestalt pictures
and various activities that we can do at that time, too,
to illustrate this.
Role play, scenarios.
Likes and dislikes.
Very basic things.
And they start to say,
"Of course, no, we don't all see the same.
"We don't all like the same things.
"We don't all see the same things the same way,
"and we don't all enjoy doing the same things."
Does that lead to obviously,
a certain amount of acceptance and tolerance
for one another?
Absolutely, and this is a very critical point
before we can get to the next step.
So from change,
as we've seen going back to the step before that,
they see that, they learn flexibility right there.
They're holding things less concrete.
They see things more,
you know, everything becomes a little bit more fluid.
Even, you know, applying this to our moods.
It will change.
And knowing that it will change.
I would think that would make life
not so frightening.
Not so frightening, not so frightening.
Although there's the other side of change
that can make you feel a little insecure sometimes.
And of course for adults, ultimately,
it's the change of death or loss of.
So actually a lot of our harmful emotions
are rooted in fear and fear of change, too.
So it's important for children
actually to have the courage
to look at change,
to understand it in a very practical and logical way.
But also it allows for, in that way it allows for
resiliency, for courage and resiliency.
And then into this next, into the step four of
your mind creates your reality,
in that same way seeing
that our views and our emotions change
and our views, our likes and dislikes also change.
That maybe, you know,
somebody who we really enjoyed playing with in the morning,
says something we don't like,
and so in the afternoon
we don't want to have anything to do with them.
So that's just a very obvious example
of how our perception is influenced by our moods.
But now they can see that, too,
that the way that we see things
because the way that we see things in our view
changes and shifts,
even in a matter of moments,
and it's constantly changing actually.
So, too, can we embrace and understand, you know,
another person's view
that another person may be seeing something,
and we know actually that they are,
in some way they're seeing what we're seeing
in a slightly different way,
according to their filters.
And they start to understand that.
We talk about,
"Why do you think that is, you know,
"that we all see things differently?"
And they trace it back to
like memory.
That they've had an experience, a scenario,
you know, you're playing with a friend.
And another friend comes in, arrives,
and wants to play, you know.
How do you feel about it?
And one child might say,
"I don't like it and I want to go home."
And the other child might say,
"Yeah it's great.
"I've got two friends to play with now."
Why did they react so differently.
Well, you know, so it's a very logical.
They say, "Oh well, you know,"
and the one who didn't, who wants to go home says,
"Well last time I was playing with a friend,
another friend came and I got left out, you know."
Right.
So, it's very logical for them again.
And they understand.
And they can empathize, they can understand.
Everybody's had those kind of feelings and experiences
come up at some time or other.
Then this gives rise then to
all these steps that have come before
and the understanding they've gained,
they start to see now that the emotions
can be transformed.
They can start to have a choice
as to what they're going to respond to.
So they know that their feelings
and that their thoughts
are going to influence the way
that they see a situation.
They're going to be able now to
as they start to recognize their,
more in touch with their feelings, their thoughts,
they're going to start to become more aware
of when anger is arising or frustration.
And before they explode,
the idea is that they take space.
So we've got a whole sort of 10-step
conflict resolution approach to dealing with issues.
And we also have what we call the five R's,
which is a way of viewing
sort of mistakes or obstacles and difficulties
that arise in ourselves as opportunities.
The first "R" would be remembering.
So when we start to feel this energy, you know,
bubbling up in us,
we start to feel,
"Oh, I'm getting really, really frustrated."
Before you explode,
because you know once you explode
it makes a big mess,
and we start creating and affecting everybody else
around us,
and it actually doesn't bring us what we want.
Uh hmm.
Right, going back to that step one.
Very important thing to learn early in life.
Exactly.
Because many, many people
go to their grave and never learn this.
Yeah, exactly.
That's absolutely true.
And we could avoid so many problems
and so much sadness and difficulty,
couldn't we?
Yes.
So I think it's really important work.
Very, very.
And what do you see when you,
when the kids have cycled through,
what age group, what age range
are we talking about?
Here, it's just, we have a program from preschool
through, so three years old through 10 years old.
10 years old.
So that's good span.
You have them for a number of years there.
And what have you seen
coming out the other end at the age of 10,
by the age of 10?
How good can it be?
(laughs)
Well, we see children who are just much,
and definitely can articulate their feelings
in a situation on a very different level.
They go in, they can see all the interconnected pieces
of a situation.
They're also a model for their parents,
even actually at preschool age,
and kindergarten age,
they can model for their parents
how to deal with your emotions
when they start to arise.
"You know, you just need to take some space
"and cool down."
Uh hmm.
And then we, when we take space and cool down,
anyway there's, then we can come back when we feel
we're ready to, to the situation.
So we always have a peace room
and a place for children to be able to do that.
You know, a designated area
so that they can get the space and cool down
when they need to.
So they model that for their parents.
We've heard that children who've left the school
and gone into public school,
that they become the models
for other children in the school.
That they help with conflict resolution.
They teach children how to use their bracelets
as power beads
to help to find their power, you know.
And that's one of the activities and the tools we use.
So there's definitely, it goes with them
and they continue to use it.
But I think the longer,
the most important thing then
is to actually bridge that gap between
home and school.
And for the parents to be a part of the process as well
and the program,
so that they can take a lot of these activities home
and keep it going after the children leave school.
You know, there's a
it's a very strong current,
a very, it's a big world out there.
And there's a lot of different things that can come in
and influence a child's life
and our lives.
So the longer it can be these practices
and these ways of thinking can be reinforced
for the children,
the easier it's going to be and more longevity.
And that's what I tried to create
with this program,
was something that was very integrated,
and that really would make
that shift in the mind of the child.
(light music)
For more information on upcoming training
in Pamela's methods,
please visit her website,
at TaraRedwoodSchool.org.
Until next time,
thanks for watching CMN.
(light music)